Let's discuss the specifics of an LC-3 add instruction.
Here's the format of an add instruction.
Remember, we have two types.
One is the register type, where you have two register values that we add.
And the second is the immediate type where
we add our source register to a sign-extended immediate.
In both cases, we have a single state for our add instruction,
after instruction decode.
We do the actual add operation, and bit five
will determine whether we use the immediate value or the other source
register value.
And then we put that value into the destination register.
Now this is done all in a single clock cycle
even though there are several steps that we need to follow.
The other thing that we do is because we update the register file,
we need to update the condition code as well.
Now let's look at the different phases of an add instruction
in our LC-3 micro-architecture.
Now remember, we have a single state for the add instruction,
so all this is done in a single clock cycle.
We're going to read out our registers, do the operation,
put the result on the bus and store it in the register file--
and at the same time, update the condition codes.
The first step is operant fetch.
We read our two source register values.
We also form our sign-extended immediate.
And then depending on the type of add that we had,
we'll feed one or the other to the other input of the ALU.
And we're ready to move on now to the execute part.
In the execute phase, the finite state machine control
tells the ALU to do the add operation.
In the store-result phase, the finite state machine control
asserts the gate signal for the ALU so that that value
can be put on to the bus.
We use the DR field from the instruction to pick a particular destination
register.
And then the finite state machine control
also makes the load signal for the register file to be a 1
so that we overwrite that register value.
At the same time that we're updating the register file,
we also update the condition codes by asserting the load signal
for the condition code register.
So there's a complete add instruction.
All of these phases occur in a single clock cycle.