Now let's transform our pipeline to include caches for the instruction
memory and for the data memory.
So here's what we do.
We still have our main memory, and that has an MDR and
an MAR register, just as before.
But now in instruction fetch, we've introduced an instruction cache.
And in the MEM stage, we have a data cache.
Now, the main memory is going to be composed of that DRAM.
We can put a lot of it.
We can put a lot of it on a chip.
It's very dense, and it's inexpensive.
So most of our instructions and data will sit in main memory.
And a subset of our instructions and data
will fit into these caches, which are in IF and MEM.
So not all of our instructions will fit there.
We'll have only a subset.
But so long as we find our instructions in the cache-- these are SRAM,
so they're very, very fast.
So we can keep up with the speed of our pipeline.
The same with the data cache.
We may not find always the data that we want there, but when we do,
we can run at the speed of the pipeline.
A cache is a small SRAM memory that permits rapid access to a subset
of our instructions or data.
Now if the data is in the cache-- and we're
using "data" generally here to infer to either instructions or data.
So if the data is in the cache, then we call that a cache hit.
And we can retrieve it without slowing down the pipeline.
Now if the data is not found in the cache, we call this a cache miss.
And we just now go to the main memory and retrieve it from there,
so that may take longer.
But we're hoping that most of the time, we're
going to have hits-- we're going to find what we want in the cache.
Now the hit rate is the fraction of memory accesses
that are found in the cache.
And we define the miss rate as 1 minus the hit rate.
For caches to be effective, the hit rate has to be pretty high.
Now typical caches are pretty small.
They're only, say, a few 100,000 bytes, whereas memory
may be a gigabyte in size.
So we're only holding a small fraction of our instructions or data
in our caches.
Well, it turns out that hit rates also are pretty high,
over 90%-- even over 95% in many cases.
How does this work?
How could that be?
Well, it turns out that there are properties
of our programs called locality, specifically
temporal locality and spatial locality.
Now temporal locality says, if memory location X is accessed,
then it's likely to be accessed again in the near future.
Now think about some of the things we've already talked
about in our program, such as a loop.
If I have instructions in a loop, then I'm
going to revisit those instructions over and over again
as I iterate through my loop.
So I access one particular instruction, and then I'm
going to access it again in the near future when I iterate on that loop.
Now, caches exploit temporal locality by keeping a reference instruction or data
in the cache.
This also happens when we talk about data.
So for instance a loop counter, a loop variable, is a piece of data
and w’ll be incrementing that counter over and over again.
So that also has temporal locality.
Now, we also have spatial locality in our programs.
So if memory location X is accessed, then locations near X
are likely to be accessed also in the near future.
So if you think about instructions.
Typically, we go sequentially through our instructions in memory.
So if I'm accessing an instruction at location 100,
then it's likely that I'm going to access 101 in the near future because
of spatial locality.
Now we also have this with data.
When we have things like arrays, when we do things like matrix multiply,
for instance, then we're revisiting the same rows and columns of our matrices
over and over again.
So data also has spatial locality.
And caches exploit spatial locality by bringing
in what's called a block of instructions or data into the cache on a miss.
So if I miss an instruction at the instruction located at 100,
I might bring in that and maybe the next seven instructions
after it, anticipating that I'm going to walk sequentially through my program
and get to those instructions next.
So because of that property of spatial locality
and because we bring in a whole block of instructions into the cache, then
we can get these very high hit rates.