So what forthcoming trends do you see in the field, and the future challenges
that are facing computer architects?
So I think the single biggest challenge facing
architects, which should be keeping the entire semiconductor
industry up all night, is essentially the inevitable of Moore's law.
So Moore's law says that every 18 to 24 months
the number of transistors per die will double.
And for a long time the entire field has basically
ridden this technology scaling.
Yes, architects make tremendous contributions
in terms of microarchitecture, in terms of the instruction set design,
in terms of how to expose this to software.
But a lot of the benefit really comes from the fact that in two years
I can put more transistors on a die.
Those transistors get faster.
And to first order, the power density doesn't get too much worse.
So I can get-- and the cost stays about the same too.
But within the next decade I think it's becoming increasingly clear
that that technology scaling will either stop or slow tremendously.
And it just has to do with physics.
We're getting now to the point where we measure transistors in hundred atoms.
And we're just going to run out of space.
And they're not going to look like transistors.
They're going to look like quantum devices.
So on one hand this is a very scary situation.
Because now we have this kind of impending end of this technology
scaling.
But on the other hand, it's a tremendous time to be a computer architect.
Because I imagine in the future architects
are really going to be the only game in town.
You're going to have a potpourri of different technologies.
You're going to have maybe molecular computing, different type
of semiconductors, maybe a little quantum computing in terms
of high performance computing, but this potpourri
of different types of technologies.
But I don't see anything coming in and replacing silicon CMOS.
And it's analogous to how right now, if I want to build a new building,
I am sure I could go to material scientists
and they could talk to me about exotic polymers that
have so many benefits compared to steel and concrete.
Yet what do I use to build a building?
Steel and concrete.
Because that's what the infrastructure has developed.
That's what everybody knows how to use.
And that's the best materials, broadly.
I think it'll be the same thing.
So silicon CMOS technology will be the standard.
There might be some potpourri of different technologies.
And so what will really differentiate one system from another system
is not the technology, but we you do with it.
And who decides what we do with the technology?
Architects.
Architects are the ones that differentiate
one chip for another chip in its given technology node.
So architects will become the only game in town.
And we-- architects will have a much bigger role
in terms of designing future chips.
I can almost see a resurgence in terms of chip design start ups
and basically emphasis on new types of chips
that basically exploit whether it be applications in specific ways,
classes of applications, new types of accelerators.
So I think that makes it a particularly exciting time
to study the field of computer architecture specifically,
and more broadly computer engineering.
Professor Christopher Batten from Cornell University.
Chris, thanks for joining us.
It was a pleasure.
Thank you for having me.