Now we've seen combinational logic circuits where the outputs depend only
on the current values of the inputs.
So when an input changes after some delay,
and it takes some time for those transistors to switch,
then we'll see a change in the output.
Now, sequential circuits also have combinational logic.
Those are an integral part of a sequential circuit,
but they also have this idea of state, of storage.
And in many sequential circuits, there's also feedback.
So the output depends on the current values
of the inputs plus the past history, which is embodied in the state.
So the state saves some information from the past,
and it saves that information using a periodic signal called the clock.
Now, what you'll notice is that as the combinational logic circuit advances,
as the outputs change, the state also may change.
That gets captured, and that feeds back in as an input to a combinational logic
circuit.
And that in turn may change the value of the next state as well as the outputs.
So we have combinational logic, just like the circuits we've seen before,
but now we have this idea of state, of storage, of keeping some past history,
and feeding that back in as an input.
So in sequential circuits the outputs depend on the inputs,
just as with combinational logic, and also on the state variables.
And these state variables capture what has
happened to the circuit in the past.
Now, storage elements are a key element of sequential circuits
because they're used to hold the state variables.
And we also have a key input called a clock,
and a clock is a periodic signal which advances the circuit.
Now let's talk about these storage elements.
Computers need to save data for later use.
In your smartphone, you have storage, and you have permanent storage
and you also have memories, and these memories store information,
such as data and instructions, which are used by the processor.
And we're going to see these memories later in the course.
We're also going to see this data and instructions.
Now, some memories use latches or flip-flops as the storage element.
And these flip-flops are also used to store the state in sequential logic
circuits.