Now that we've covered conditionals in C, let's move on to iteration.
In particular, we're going to look at the for construct.
So here's a general outline of for code.
So we have for, and then we have an open parentheses.
And then we have some initialization, typically
initialization of a loop variable.
Then we have a semicolon followed by a test,
and this tests to see whether we jump out of the loop or whether we do the loop.
Then we have another semicolon, and then we have some reinitialization.
And this again may have to do with the loop variable.
And then we have a close parenthesis.
And then we have the loop body.
So this is the actions that we take within the loop.
Now, we do this initialization first, as shown in this flow diagram.
The first thing we do is we initialize.
And that's usually initializing a loop variable.
And then we do this test.
And so before we enter the loop for the first time,
we are testing to see whether this condition is true or false.
And if it's true, we're going to then enter the loop body.
And then we do some reinitialization.
And this is associated, usually, with the loop variable.
And then we go back and we do this test again.
And we continue to iterate and do this loop over and over again so
long as the test condition is met.
And when it's not, then we jump out of the loop.
So, again, note that the test is evaluated
before we execute the loop body.
So we may fail that test initially and never execute the loop body
and just fall out.
Now let's look at how we generate the LC-3 code for a particular for loop.
So here's an example.
We’re first outside of the for loop, before the for loop.
We initialize x to 0.
And then we have this for loop where the initialization is i equals 0.
So i is our loop variable.
We initialize that to 0.
And then the test is i is less than n.
And then the reinitialization is i++, is incrementing i.
And then within the loop we have a single statement, which
is x equals x plus i.
So in the end, x will be the summation of all of the integers from 0
to n minus 1.
Now let's look at how we compile this C code to LC-3 assembly language
instructions.
Now, we have three variables, n, i, and x.
And we're going to assume that R4 is the address of variable n
and that R4 plus 1 points to i and R4 plus 2 points to x.
So those are stored in three consecutive memory locations.
After we initialize x, we load the variable n into R1.
We then form the negative value by first NOTing R1 and then ADDing 1 to it.
So this forms the 2s complement.
Then we do the initialization part of our for loop, where we set R2 to 0,
and that's our variable i.
Next is the test.
Here we need to test whether i is less than n.
The way that we'll do this is we'll do i minus n,
and then we'll see whether the N bit is set.
If that's true, that means that i is less than n
and we should enter the loop body.
If that's not true, then instead the Z or the P bits will be set.
That means that i is greater than or equal to n,
and we're going to exit the loop and go to the label DONE.
Assuming that the test is met-- that is, i is less than n--
then we'll do the operation x equals x plus i.
Then we do the reinitialization, which is to increment i.
Then we have a branch always, which brings us back
to the beginning of our loop, where we do the test again.
We'll continue to execute this loop, the loop body and the reinitialization,
so long as the condition is met.
Once that condition is not met, then we move to DONE.
Here we're going to store the variables i and x
to the respective locations in memory.
The LC-3 code that we just generated has two branches within the loop.
We can generate some alternative code which is functionally the same
but has only a single branch within the loop.
So if we look at our original flow diagram, the first branch in our loop
is this test.
And the second branch is an unconditional branch
after the reinitialization back to the test.
So every time we iterate on this loop, we will do two branches.
Now, we can do this a little bit differently and only
have one test within our loop.
And here's what that flow diagram looks like.
As before, we have the initialization and then the initial test
before we enter the loop body.
Now, once we enter the loop body and we do the reinitialization,
then we only have one test at the end to see, again,
whether the condition is met.
So now on each iteration of the loop, we only
have a single conditional branch test rather than two
that we had in our previous example.
So what this means is that each loop iteration will
execute fewer instructions, and so we'll have fewer cycles
to execute our program.
Now let's generate the LC-3 code for this new for flow diagram.
Now, you notice that the first seven instructions are exactly the same
as we had before, except now we've moved our LOOP label down two instructions
to the ADD instruction, which is the loop body.
So if the first branch is taken, then we'll just skip the loop altogether.
If not, then we enter the loop, we do the loop body, the reinitialization--
but at the end of our loop, we have a test to see whether i is less than n.
If that's true, the N bit will be set, and we will branch back
to the top of the loop.
And then we will continue to iterate through these
four instructions in our loop until the test condition fails.
Then we do the same two stores that we had in our previous example.
Now, if you compare the two examples, you
notice that we've actually added one more instruction to our code.
But now we've shortened our loop to be only four instructions rather
than five.
So, for instance, if we do this loop 100 times, in our previous example,
we'd execute 500 instructions.
Here we do 100 less.
We'd only do 400.
So we'd end up with faster code when we execute it.