In addition to problems with data dependencies,
we also have challenges in our pipeline when it comes to branches.
Let's look at this example LC-3 code.
We have an ADD instruction that writes R7.
We have a branch instruction following that
that tests the condition code of that result of that write.
And it's testing to see if the Z bit is set.
If the Z bit is set, then we're going to skip the next three
instructions and some others after that and we're going to move to the label X
where we have a store instruction.
If the Z bit is not set, then we're going
to do the ADD instruction, the NOT instruction, and the AND instruction.
Let's see how this works out in our pipeline.
So first of all, we have to do the ADD instruction to the extent
that we know the value of R7.
We know whether it's 0, positive, or negative.
So we can set the condition codes.
Now, we don't know that until after we've done the ALU operation.
So the soonest that we can check the branch
condition with some special hardware is in clock cycle four.
So in clock cycle four, we've got the value of R7.
We could add some special hardware so that we know at that point
whether the Z bit is set.
And then we can test that condition in clock cycle four
and then change the PC accordingly.
Now the problem is is in clock cycle four,
we've already moved the ADD instruction into decode,
and we've already fetched the NOT instruction.
So we don't even know whether this branch is taken or not.
And if it is taken, we've fetched the wrong instructions.
We shouldn't have fetched the ADD and the NOT.
Instead, we should've fetched the STR instruction.
So we have this special hardware where we can check the branch condition,
but it comes a little bit late in our pipeline-- after the point
where we've already fetched a couple of instructions.
Now this is called a control hazard, where we've potentially fetched
the wrong instructions.
Now, we can easily throw those away later on in our pipeline,
prevent them from writing their registers.
But we've wasted cycles by fetching those instructions rather than
the correct ones.
So here is our example.
We have a branch where we're testing the Z bit,
and we have a label X. And then we have the ADD
and the NOT instructions after that.
So in the ALU stage, we are going to test our branch condition
and know our branch condition and change our PC.
But we've already fetched the ADD and the NOT instructions--
even if the branch was taken.
So in that case, we would have gotten the wrong instructions.
So what should happen here is if the branch is not taken,
the next fetch instruction should be at the incremented PC,
and that's the ADD instruction.
If the branch is taken, then the next fetch instruction
should be at address X-- at that label.
And that's the STR instruction.
Now what actually happens is that regardless of the outcome,
the next two instructions are fetched— the ones at PC+1 and PC+2,
the ADD and the NOT.
And if the branch is taken, well, we've fetched the wrong instructions.
Now this won't necessarily break our pipeline, like in our data hazard case.
What we can do is we can recognize this case,
and we can just force the ADD and the NOT instructions to take no action.
We make sure that they don't update the registers.
And that's easily done within our pipeline.
However we've kind of wasted pipeline resources here.
We could have been fetching good instructions.
Instead, we have to throw these instructions away.
So we're adding cycles to our execution time that we'd rather not have to do.
One way we can avoid those extra cycles is by using branch prediction.
So when fetching the branch instruction, we're
actually going to predict the branch outcome-- whether it's taken or not
taken-- as well as the target address.
And this is the new PC if the branch turns out to be taken.
So we're going to have prediction hardware that's in our design
in order to try to guess what the branch outcome is as well as the target.
And we're going to then assume that we're right,
and we're going to fetch instructions from the predicted PC.
And after we execute the branch, in the EX stage for the branch,
we will verify-- we'll actually know-- whether we were right or not.
And if so, then everything is great.
We've got the right instructions in our pipeline.
We've wasted no cycles, and we just continue
fetching from this predicted path.
If not, then we need to throw away those instructions.
They were misfetched.
And then, we need to fetch from the other direction.
Now, your smartphone has a very sophisticated branch predictor.
There's been a lot of research, a lot of papers written about how
to get high-accuracy branch prediction.
We're going to talk about some general principles which
apply to that sophisticated predictor that's in your smartphone.
And the first is to do static branch prediction.
Here we make a static decision.
So for instance, we might always assume that the branch is not taken.
And that's very simple to do in hardware,
because we're just going to fetch the instructions immediately
following the branch.
If we're wrong, we'll just throw them away.
Now we can get a little more sophisticated,
and we can look at the branch offset.
And we can see whether it's positive or negative,
so look at the direction of the branch.
So for instance, if I have a loop, I'll have a negative offset.
And loops-- usually we iterate multiple times through that loop.
So a good bet is to predict taken if I have a backward branch.
Now, research has shown that for forward branches,
it's better to predict not taken.
So we might-- based on the sign bit of the target--
if it's negative, if it's a 1, then we will predict taken.
And if it's a 0, meaning we have a forward branch,
we'll predict not taken.
An advantage of this is that the hardware is very simple.
However, the accuracy is not so good.
And so your smartphone contains a dynamic branch predictor.
So when we run our programs, they repeatedly visit the same code.
So for instance, loops repeat multiple times,
and functions are called multiple times.
And so as the program runs, we can dynamically-- in the hardware--
build a history of the behavior of branches
and then use this to predict future behavior.
And these can get very, very sophisticated-- in terms of the history
that they use, in terms of the prediction mechanism.
And they can get very, very accurate.
We can get, easily, accuracies in the 90% and plus-- 95% in many cases.
Now we're going to talk about a pretty simple dynamic branch predictor,
but the principles here apply to that sophisticated predictor
that's in your smartphone.
So we need to do two things.
We need to predict the outcome as well as the target address in the case
that the branch is taken.
Now what we're going to do is when we execute a particular branch,
we're going to store the outcome-- and we're
going to say that 1 means taken and 0 not taken-
in a special piece of hardware called a Branch History Table or BHT, for short.
Now, we're going to use that to predict the outcome the next time we
see this branch.
We're also going to store the target address in what's
called a Branch Target Buffer or BTB.
So the next time we see this branch, if we predict it's taken,
we'll have the target address already calculated for us.
Now, let's look at what happens when this branch is encountered again.
Well, we'll read the predicted outcome from the BHT,
and we'll read the predicted target address from the BTB.
And if the prediction is taken, if the BHT bit is a 1,
then the PC will immediately get loaded with this predicted target address.
Now if the prediction was not taken, then we're
just going to leave the incremented PC and not change it.
Now that we have forwarding hardware to handle data hazards
and branch prediction to handle control hazards,
then we have a pipeline that operates correctly and doesn't waste cycles
by either stalling or throwing away fetched instructions.