Now let's move onto data movement instructions.
These are loads and stores.
Now a load, remember, we're getting data from memory
and putting into a register.
In a store, we're going the other way.
We're taking data from a register and we're storing it into memory.
Now for both of these, we have different ways to form the memory address.
Let's first talk about a load.
So again, with a load we're reading data from memory into a register.
With LDR, which we've already touched upon earlier, we use base+offset mode,
where we have a register value that comes as a base register.
And we add an offset from the instruction
to that to form the address.
With LD, this uses what's called PC-relative mode.
Here we're adding the offset to the PC, rather than to a base register.
But then LDI uses what's called indirect mode, where they're actually
several steps in order to get the data.
First, we get an address.
And then we use that to get the data.
Now a store has the same type of addressing modes,
except we’re going the other way with the data.
We're writing data from a register to memory.
Now the last type of data movement instruction
actually doesn't do any movement of data.
It's called load effective address.
So here we compute an address, and we save this into a register.
So it's a way of forming an address and saving it away in a register.
And it only uses immediate mode.
And again, this does not access memory.
In base+offset addressing mode, we specify a register that holds
the 16-bit base address.
We then take the signed offset that's embedded in the instruction.
We sign extend that, and we add that to the base address
in order to get the address.
Here's the format of an LDR instruction, which uses base+offset addressing mode.
It has opcode 0110.
The first thing that we do is we read the base register.
The register that we read is indicated by bits 8 through 6.
We take the rightmost 6 bits and sign extend those.
And then we add those two together.
And that gives us our memory address, which we send to the MAR register.
The memory then reads the data at that location
and puts it into the MDR register.
And then the last step, the contents of the MDR register,
are stored into the register file at the location indicated by the destination
register.
That's bits 11 through 9.
With STR, we form the address in the exact same way
and put it into the MAR register.
But the difference here is now we're storing data from a register
into memory.
So the data from the source register gets put into MDR,
and then the memory writes that data into the address indicated by MAR.