We're going to illustrate the usage of branch instructions
by going over our first program.
Now, this program is going to compute the sum of 12 integers.
Now, here are some assumptions about our program.
First of all, where are our numbers located?
Well, let's assume that they're located beginning at hex location x3100.
That's where our first number to be added up is.
And our program, let's assume, is stored starting at location x3000.
Now, here's an overall flow diagram that shows what this program needs to do.
First of all, we need to initialize some values.
Let's assume that register 1 is going to hold
the starting location of our numbers.
So we need to load register 1 with the number x3100.
Our sum is going to go into register 3, so we need to initialize that to 0.
And the register 2 is going to tell us how many numbers we need to add up.
So it's going to keep count on whether we've reached the end,
we've added all 12 up.
So we're going to initialize that with the number 12.
Now, here's the main loop in our program.
First of all, we check to see whether R2 is 0.
Have we added up all of our numbers?
If so, then we're done.
We've done the complete addition.
If not, then we're going to do a number of things.
First of all, we're going to get the next number.
And remember that R1 is going to point to the number that we're going to get.
Now, we're going to get that number from memory,
and then we're going to put it into register 4.
Then we're going to add that to our running total.
Remember, R3 holds our running total.
So we're going to add R4 to R3 and put that back into R3.
Now what we need to do is we need to increment
our pointer to our next number.
So we take R1-- remember, that points to the next number to get,
and we add 1 to it, and we store that back into R1--
and then we decrement our count of the number of numbers to add.
Remember R2 is initially 12.
Now, once we've added our first number, we're
going to decrement that and say that we have 11 left.
And we continue to do this loop until R2 reaches 0, which tells us
that we've added up all of our numbers.