Now, before we talk about flip-flops, we need to cover the clock.
The clock is a very important input to a sequential logic
circuit that changes the values of that circuit at a specified rate.
And it's a periodic input that looks like this.
You can see that it goes from 0 to 1, and stays 1 for awhile.
It goes back to 0, then back to 1, then back to 0.
And it does this 0 to 1 change and 1 to 0 change for as long
as we have power to our circuit.
So what I'm showing here is time progressing from left to right.
So as time progresses from left to right,
the clock just periodically goes up and down.
Now the clock period is the time between successive transitions
in the same direction.
For instance, from 0 to 1, or 1 to 0.
And here's an example here where I have a clock period,
and this we call also as having one cycle of our clock.
Now, the clock period can be, for instance, one millisecond, two
nanoseconds, 250 picoseconds.
Those are some examples of clock periods.
And the clock frequency is 1 over the period.
Now, when you buy your smartphone, you might
be able to look into what the frequency is of the processor.
Now that is 1 over the clock period.
So if I take that 1 millisecond, 2 nanoseconds, and 250 picoseconds,
and I invert those, then I get a clock frequency
of 1 kilohertz, 500 megahertz, and 4 gigahertz.
The triggering edge is the transition of the clock, 0 to 1 or 1 to 0,
that captures input data in flip-flops.
And a clock tick is what we use to talk about the occurrence of a triggering
edge.
Now that we've seen the clock, let's talk about a flip-flop.
A flip-flop samples the input on the triggering edge of the clock.
And when that's the rising edge of the clock, when it goes from 0 to 1,
we call that a positive edge triggered flip-flop.
And those are the type we're going to talk about in this course.
You can also capture on the falling edge of the clock,
and we call that a negative edge triggered flip-flop.
And a D flip-flop can be designed in a number of ways.
The simplest way to design it, which is the way we're going to do it,
is to put two D latches back to back.
Now, a D flip-flop is similar to a D latch, in that it captures the input D.
But with a D flip-flop, it's different, in that
captures it based on the clock input.
Now, a D flip-flop has two D latches back to back.
And I'm representing a D latch by this symbol here.
So here we have our first D latch, which captures the input D.
And that output Q of that D latch feeds a second D latch.
And then the output of that D latch is the output of our D flip-flop.
And just like with the D latch, we can have outputs Q as well as Q prime.
Now, the write enable are controlled for these two D
latches are controlled by the clock.
What we do is we take our clock input, and we pass that through an inverter,
and then we feed that to the first D latche’s write enable.
And then we invert that again, and we feed that to the second write enable.
Now that we see how we design a D flip-flop, let's talk about how
it operates.
And we're going to do this by use of a timing diagram.
Now, you've already seen a timing diagram when I showed you the clock.
So we could see how the clock changes its value
as time progresses from left to right.
We're going to draw a more complicated diagram, where
we have all of our inputs and our outputs,
as well as the internal signals Q1, CLKL1, and CLKL2.
So let's draw this timing diagram.
First, let's start with our clock.
So let's assume that our clock is initially 1 and it goes to 0,
and 1 and 0 to 1.
It progresses in that periodic fashion.
Now CLKL1 is the inverted value of clock.
So let's draw that.
And then CLKL2 is inverted again, so it looks like our original clock.
Now, let's look at this CLKL1 and CLKL2.
Now, what you'll notice is, when we understand the operation of a D
latch here, when the write enable is a 1, that opens the latch.
So you see when CLKL1 is a 1, then latch 1 is open.
But at that time, CLKL2 is a 0, so that latch is closed.
So when we get a change in the input, D, that will appear at the output Q1
because latch 1 is open.
But we won't see the change in latch 2 at the output Q, because that's closed.
It's not until we see the clock going from 0 to 1,
and CLKL2 going from 0 to 1, that we're going to open that D latch,
and then the value of the output Q will change.
So this is what we mean by a D flip-flop triggers on the change of the clock.
When we get from 0 to 1 on the clock, that's
when we see the change in the output Q. It's only at that point
that we see the change.
Now, D will keep its value of 1 for a full clock period or clock cycle.
But then it may change again.
Let's assume that it changes to a 0.
Now, again, our latch 1 is open.
So Q1 will change after some delay.
But latch 2 is closed, so Q is not going to change at that point.
It's only when the clock goes from 0 to 1, the triggering
edge, that latch 2 will open.
At that point, we're going to see Q go from 1 to 0.
So you can verify for yourself, when you change D from 1 to 0 and 0
to 1, that the output, Q, is not going to change until we
see that clock triggering edge.
Until we see it go from 0 to 1.
Now that we've seen how a D flip-flop works,
we're ready to draw the truth table.
We have two inputs, D and CLK, and two outputs, Q and Q prime.
Now when D equals 0, it's only when we see a change in the clock,
from 0 to 1, that triggering edge, does Q change.
So we're going to represent it this way.
We're going to show the symbol of the clock changing from 0 to 1.
That's when the output Q goes to 0, and Q prime goes to 1.
Now when D equals 1, again, we see that triggering edge of the clock.
Then Q will change to 1, and Q prime will change to 0.
Now, what happens when our clock is a 0?
A steady value?
Well, it doesn't matter what the value of D is.
And when we say it doesn't matter, sometimes we
call that don't care, in digital logic.
And we represent that as an X in our truth table.
So D doesn't matter, because when the clock is 0,
we're going to keep the present values of Q and Q prime.
And the same is true when the clock is steady at a value of a 1.
It doesn't matter what D is, we're going to retain the values of Q and Q prime.
Now, instead of drawing these D latches and inverters,
we're going to represent a D flip-flop by this symbol.
So we're going to go now into variations in the D flip-flop,
and we're going to assume that we have this basic circuit.