We'll begin by discussing how we measure performance in our computer.
One way to do that is to measure what's called execution time.
And this is the time between the start and completion of a task.
And this is sometimes called response time.
So this is like taking a stopwatch, and starting the stopwatch when
your program begins executing, and stopping it when
it's done with the last instruction.
Another way is throughput, or bandwidth.
Here we measure the total amount of work done in a given time.
And this can be a very important measure in things like data centers,
where it's important to get a lot of transactions done at the same time.
For instance, a lot of searches at a Google data center,
getting those done, a lot of those at the same time, is very, very important.
That gives you high throughput, high work per given time.
So what does it mean with these two definitions to improve performance?
Well, we either reduce execution time-- that task completes
in a shorter amount of time-- or we increase
throughput-- we get more work done in a given amount of time.
We're going to use CPU execution time as our measure of performance,
where CPU stands for Central Processing Unit.
You could think of this as just another name for our processor.
Now this is the amount of time that the CPU takes to run a program.
And here's an equation for it.
CPU execution time equals clock cycles-- this is the number of clock cycles
to run our program-- times the clock cycle
time-- that's the length of each clock, which is 1 over the frequency.
Now we can take the number of clock cycles,
and we can further break that down like this.
That's the number of instructions times cycles per instructions.
Now cycles per instruction is an average.
It's an average amount of cycles required
to execute each of our instructions.
Now we can put this together, and look back at our CPU execution time
equation, and break it down like this.
So it's IC-- and this is the number of instructions
in the program-- times CPI-- this is the average number of cycles
per instruction-- times the clock cycle time, which is 1 over the frequency.
So now the question becomes, given this equation, well,
how do we make our computer faster?
In order to answer this question, we need
to understand what impacts CPU execution time.
Well, first there's the compiler.
The compiler is the software that translates your high level language
program to machine code.
And so it can make decisions in terms of how it implements high level constructs
as machine code instructions.
In fact, you can tell your compiler I'm willing to wait
more time to get my program, my machine code, if you make it faster.
So there are compiler flags that you can use to make your compiler make a faster
program.
So it has a big impact on CPU execution time,
as does the instruction set architecture.
So let's take an example, a high level language multiply.
Well, the compiler can choose a multiply instruction,
if that's in the instruction set.
But if we have the LC-3, where we don't have a multiply,
then the compiler has to create the code using add instructions
and using a loop, in order to create that multiply.
So the ISA can have another big impact on CPU execution time.
Now the microarchitecture also has a big impact.
So take that multiply instruction.
Does it take me 4 cycles, or 10 cycles, or 20 cycles to execute it?
Well, that's what the microarchitecture does.
It's the hardware implementation of that multiply instruction.
Now circuit design also has a big impact.
If I can design faster circuits, then for instance
I can have a smaller cycle time, which will impact my CPU execution time.
And in the same way, the process technology,
which is the technology that creates our transistors,
well, we can make potentially faster transistors,
and also impact CPU execution time.
Example again is cycle time could be impacted.
Let's go one by one through instruction count, cycle time, and CPI,
and discuss what primarily impacts each one of them.
Now instruction count is the total number of instructions in the program.
So what primarily impacts IC?
Well, first there's the instruction set architecture.
If we take that multiply example again, if I have a multiply instruction
I can do that in one instruction.
If I don't, then I have to construct a loop, which
is going to have more instructions than just that single multiply.
Now also there's the instructions chosen by the compiler.
Given a high level language construct, the compiler
can choose to do multiple things, in terms of what instructions
it chooses in the ISA.
So for example, let's take a multiply where my two operands are in memory,
and my result I want to store into memory.
Well, with an ISA like the LC-3, then what we can do
is first we can do two loads to get our operands and our registers.
We can do a multiply, and put the result into a register,
and then we can do a store, so there will be four instructions.
Now some instruction sets have one instruction
that can do that whole thing.
I can read two operands from memory with one instruction,
multiply them, and store the result.
So the compiler would have a choice to make in this example.
Now you might say, why not pick the second one,
where I only have one instruction that does the whole thing?
Well as it turns out, when we design a pipeline machine like we're
going to do later in the course, that using those four instructions
can actually make for a faster computer.
So we'll get a lower CPI, at the expense of a higher IC.
So there's a trade off to be made here between IC and CPI,
and sometimes cycle time.
So the compiler has to make these choices when considering all of those
together.
And so it may actually choose a sequence that has a higher IC,
rather than a smaller IC.
Let's talk about what impacts cycle time, or CT, which is our clock period,
or 1 over the frequency.
Well, the process technology certainly impacts it.
How fast we can make our transistors will have an impact on our frequency,
as will the circuit design.
If I can make faster gates, then I can have a faster frequency, as well.
Now the microarchitecture also has a big impact.
Let's go back to our example of a multiply.
So our multiply is a more complex operation
than doing, say, a simple add.
Now I can choose in the microarchitecture
to make each one of those to be a one cycle operation.
But that's going to mean that the add is just way too slow than it needs to be.
So my clock frequency is going to be slower,
because it's going to be set by the slow multiply instruction.
Now what I may choose to do instead is to make an add be one cycle,
but a multiply be four cycles.
And we see this very commonly in our smartphone processors.
So we don't make them all take the same number of cycles,
and that gives us a faster cycle time.
Now that increases our CPI, because now our multiply, instead of being
one cycle, is going to be four cycles.
So our CPI goes up, but we get a faster cycle time.
And again, this is another example of trade offs
that we need to make between these three components.
Finally, we have cycles per instruction, or CPI.
This is the average number of cycles required to execute each instruction.
Now different instructions may have a different CPI.
So for instance an add or an and may have a CPI of 1,
and a multiply may have 4.
And a load may be even longer, because we have to get data from memory.
But this is the average CPI, over all of the instructions
that we execute in our program.
Now what primarily impacts CPI?
Well, the instruction set architecture certainly does.
Let's take that example of a multiply again.
Let's assume that the only way we can do a multiply in our ISA
is to get two operands from memory, and do the multiply
and then write the result to memory.
So the compiler will have to choose that instruction,
and that's going to be a high CPI instruction.
Because we have to get two operands from memory
we have to do that multiply operation, which may take several cycles,
and then it’s going to take us multiple cycles to do a store.
So that's going to be a very high CPI instruction,
and if the compiler doesn't have alternatives,
it's going to have to pick this high CPI instruction.
Now generally, though, the compiler may have alternatives.
So in that example earlier of doing a multiply in this way, where I just
have one instruction, versus two loads and multiplying a store, well,
this is a decision that the compiler can make, and that's going to impact CPI.
And again, the compiler may make this decision
in order to trade off CPI with IC.
Now the other thing that the compiler can do
is potentially reorder instructions.
And we'll see this later in the course, when
we talk about data dependences between instructions.
So the compiler can make some choices there, to make our CPI be lower.
And then finally there's the microarchitecture.
So the microarchitecture will impact the CPI.
So this multiply instruction, whether it takes me
2 cycles or 4 cycles, or 10 cycles, well,
that's going to impact my overall CPI.