To recap, we've talked about 3 types of parallelism.
ILP, TLP, and DLP.
Now, many processors exploit all 3 of these
because the best performance per watt-- the best way
to get the performance that we need the most energy efficient manner--
is achieved with each of these in moderation, rather than taking 1 or 2
of these to the extreme.
Let's start with ILP.
So typically, we have a 2-to-6-way superscalar pipeline
in our smartphone processors.
And this is because now, theoretically-- and engineers
know how to make wider super scalar pipelines--
but the performance improvement tapers off with wider pipelines.
Well, the power may increase significantly,
and the performance improvement tapers off
because of things such as data dependencies.
So we may have a 16 way super scalar pipeline,
but it could be that we can only say, issue four instructions at a time.
So we're wasting resources, and those resources may burn power.
So we typically keep ILP to 2-to-6-way superscalar pipeline.
For TLP, you may see-- and again, this is controversial,
depends on your smartphone-- you may see support for 2 threads
because that could require a small amount of additional hardware
over a single thread superscalar pipeline.
And this could improve the efficiency of the hardware
compared to superscalar alone.
Because some resources that might be otherwise
idle get to be used by a second thread.
Now, DLP via SIMD-- there are many applications
such as graphics and video/audio processing
that make this worthwhile, that have data level parallelism.
So what you commonly see-- and we mentioned
ARM has something called Neon, and Intel has something called SSE--
you commonly see these processors that run our apps have
some sort of SIMD support as well.
So your smartphone processor supports ILP, it supports DLP,
and it certainly supports TLP.
And the question is whether it supports it in the single processor itself,
or whether it relies instead on multicore.
And that's what we're going to talk about later in the course.