Let's return to our Von Neumann model of a computer system.
We've already talked about the processing
unit, the control unit and the memory.
But with a machine like a smartphone, input and output are essential.
We need some way to input our information into the machine,
as well as to receive output, to receive information from the machine.
Now we're going to talk about those two pieces of the Von Neumann model.
Input/output, or I/O for short, is our way
to connect the machine to the outside world.
So so far we've covered about how we compute with values and registers,
how we move data and instructions between memory and the processing unit--
but we need a way to interact with the user.
We also need some permanent storage.
So the memory that we have is temporary storage for our instructions
and our data for running programs, but we
need a way to store our apps permanently on our smartphone.
There are many examples of input/output devices in computer systems.
Let's talk about a few.
For user input, we have, for instance, a touchscreen.
That's one of the main ways that we provide input to our smartphones.
We also have a microphone that provides audio input and a camera that
may provide a video or a photo to our smartphone.
Now, in other computer systems you may have used, such as a laptop,
you might have a keyboard.
You may have a separate mouse.
Or you may have a touchpad.
For a game machine, you may have a game controller.
That's also a user input device.
For user output, our touchscreen also provides visual output to us,
and we may have a speaker also, and we get audio output as well.
And for other machines you may have used, like a laptop,
you may have a display, for instance.
Or you may have a printer attached to your laptop.
That's also an output device.
Now, we also have permanent storage in our computer systems.
For a smartphone, that's primarily flash memory.
Flash memory is a special type of memory that we'll
talk about later on in the course where we permanently hold our apps.
Now, if you have a laptop, you may have a solid-state drive or a disc drive,
or you may have a CD or a DVD drive.
We also have communication.
We have a network.
We may have multiple networks.
We may have a Bluetooth network, or we may have a connection to the Internet.
And that's both an input and an output.
Just like, actually, permanent storage provides both input and output,
a network also provides both input and output.
Now, we also have sensors.
So we may have a motion sensor or an accelerometer in our smartphones
that provides sensor input.
And so we have all of these different types of input/output devices.
And the ones that we have are specific to the type of computer system
that we're using.