Now let's move on to talking about memory.
Now, memory should be familiar to you, because we covered it in digital logic.
So to review, a memory is a 2 to the k by m array of stored bits.
Now, in this case, this is going to hold instructions and data for a machine.
If you remember, the address is a k-bit identifier of location.
Now, in this example, I have a 4-bit address to identify 1 of 16 locations,
and the contents are an m-bit value that's stored in location.
Here I have 8 bits in every location.
Now there are two operations that we're going to do to our memory.
One is called a load.
Here we're going to read a value from a memory location.
In our case, we're going to read that value,
and we're going to put it into one of the registers in our processing unit.
We can also go the other way.
We're also going to take a value from a register,
and we're going to store it into memory.
We're going to take it from that register,
and we're going to write it into a particular location in memory.
The memory interface defines how the processor communicates with the memory.
Now, our processor needs to read and write memory.
And so first of all, we need a place to hold the address--
the location that we want to read or write.
And we do that through a Memory Address Register.
So the processor can send the address, and load it
into the Memory Address Register.
Now, the Memory Data Register holds the data
that we're either going to load or to store.
Let's first talk about how we do a load.
So to load from a location-- let's just call it A--
that's our address-- we write the address, this A, into the Memory
Address Register, the MAR.
We then tell the memory that we want to read,
because the memory needs to know are we reading or are we writing.
So we send a read signal to the memory.
And then the memory gets the data from the address location,
and then puts that into the MDR.
Now, when we do a store, we go the other way.
Here we have a value X that we're getting from a register.
And we're going to put it into the location A.
So first, we write the data X to the MDR, to the Memory Data Register.
We also write the address A into the Memory Address Register.
We tell the memory to write, so we send a write signal to the memory.
And then the memory has the address and has the data,
and puts that data into that location in memory.