Now we're going to start at the bottom of the stack, specifically,
digital logic.
Now let's look at that phrase digital logic.
First, let's talk about the digital part.
Well, electronic circuits are inherently analog,
because they produce a continuous range of voltages.
But in a digital system, we're only concerned
with the discrete range of values.
And in a binary digital system, which is built a round the base two number
system, which is what's used in our computers,
we're only concerned with two voltage values.
One to represent a one and the other to represent a zero.
Now let's look at the logic part.
So logic refers to the logical operation's AND, OR, and NOT.
So for instance, not x, or x and y.
And we bring these two ideas together in digital logic.
This idea of using a discrete range of values,
specifically associated with the binary number system, .
And then this idea of these logical operations.
And we bring these together to form what's called logic gates.
These are digital circuits that can perform these logical operations.
Now these circuits are constructed from what's called transistors
and there are many, many little transistors
within your smartphone chip.
These you can think of as just little switches and using these switches
we can school we can construct these digital logic functions.
Now from there we can build up the digital logic stack.
And we can use these logic gates to create
useful functions such as a multiplexer and you could
think of a multiplexer as a selector.
So it selects one of a number of values to appear at the output.
And this becomes very useful later on we talk about the computerization
part of our course.
Now from here we could also build up storage.
Now all computer systems have storage.
And we'll see that we can construct these storage devices also using
these basic logic gates.
Now once we have the storage, we can construct
a very important class of digital circuits called sequential logic
circuits.
Now these have a clock and you may have shopped for a computer system,
and you've noticed the frequency of that system.
That refers to how quickly the clock ticks
and we'll talk about that also in this section of the course.
Now a very important class of sequential logic circuits
is what's called a finite-state machine.
Now you can think of this as a controller,
and we're going to make use of this later
on when we design our computer system.
Now the last thing we need to be concerned with is what's called timing.
Now digital logic is great in that allows
us to abstract a way the details of voltage and current levels,
but we need to be concerned with the concept of time.
Because, when we switch these transistors
and we move information between them, well,
that doesn't happen instantaneously, it takes some time.
And those delays can affect how quickly we can run our clock,
how fast we can clock our system.
And so on the last part of this of this section,
we're going to talk about how we analyze our digital logic system to determine
how fast we can run our clock.
And so at the end, you'll have the full range of the stack of digital logic,
and you'll be able to apply this in a range of settings.
So we encounter digital logic every day.
So our cars have digital logic.
An ATM machine has digital logic.
If you play games, your game controller has digital logic.
It's found throughout our lives.
And we're going to apply digital logic in the next section,
specifically to the design of a computer system.