Now that we've introduced pipelining, and superscalar,
and out-of-order execution, and perhaps simultaneous multithreading, then
we have the potential for a very fast processor.
Now I say potential because our design is
going to be limited by the speed of our memory.
Now, the memory inside our smartphones is Dynamic Random-Access Memory,
or DRAM.
And DRAM has a couple of advantages.
One is it's relatively inexpensive, which is important
when we're designing smartphones.
But also, it's relatively dense.
We can pack a lot of bits on a chip with DRAM.
And that's important, because we have a very small form
factor with our smartphones.
We can't afford to put a lot of these chips inside a smartphone.
Now, the disadvantage of DRAM is that it's pretty slow relative
to our processor.
So it may take tens of cycles, or even 100 cycles
to access an instruction or data from DRAM memory.
And so although we have these very fast performance techniques,
when we do instruction fetch, we're going
to have to just wait, say, 100 cycles to get however
many instructions we're fetching.
And then we have a load instruction, we're going to wait,
again, 100 cycles in order to get the data that we want.
So this memory is going to slow down our pipeline.
Our pipeline's going to come to a crawl if we
use this DRAM, this particular type of memory.
Now, we don't want to dispense with DRAM.
We want to keep it because of those advantages I talked about.
What we're going to do to solve this problem is we're
going to introduce what's called a memory hierarchy,
a hierarchy of memories.
So we'll still have our DRAM, and that's where
we'll hold most of our instructions and data,
but we're also going to introduce-- integrate into our pipelines-- what
are called caches.
Now, a cache is a small memory.
It's very fast.
It's using a different technology.
And it's small, so it's also fast compared to DRAM.
So we're going to introduce caches, which are a different type of technology
and a different size, so that indeed when we go and fetch instructions,
when we fetch them from the cache, then it's going to be very, very quick.
We'll be able to keep up with our pipeline.
And when we do that load instruction and we access the cache,
again, we'll be able to get that data very, very quickly.
Now, the problem with caches is that we can't
make them to be as large as our DRAM.
So we can’t have, say, gigabytes like we might have in our DRAM.
Our caches are going to be pretty small.
In fact, they're going to be several orders of magnitude,
say four orders of magnitude, smaller than our DRAM.
They might be, say, 16 kilobytes or 32 kilobytes each, where
our DRAM may be a gigabyte or more.
So we're only going to hold a small subset of our instructions and data
in our caches.
And yet what we're going to find is that we can get very high hit rates.
And what that means is when we look for something
in the cache, then a lot of the time, in fact over 90% of the time,
even over 95% of the time in some cases, we're
going to find what we want, the instruction or the data, in the cache
itself.
And then only when we can't find it, that 10% or 5% of the time,
then we'll have to go off the slower main memory.
So because most of the time we hit in the cache, most of
the time we find what we want, but then our pipeline
is going to run at that fast speed.
It's only when we miss that we have to go out to the slower memory.
Now, this works.
We have this orders of magnitude difference in size.
Now, this works because of properties of our programs.
Our programs have what's called locality.
So if you think about a loop, when I fetch an instruction in a loop,
well, if I iterate on that loop, I'm going to fetch that instruction again.
So once I bring that instruction into the instruction cache,
then on the next loop iterations I'm going to hit in the cache.
So I'm only going to miss initially, and then if I iterate 1,000 times
in that loop, then the next 999 iterations
I'm going to find what I want in the cache,
and I'm going to proceed very, very quickly.
So we're going to talk about these principles of our program,
this principle of locality.
We're going to talk about how caches exploit these principles.
And then we're going to talk about different engineering
trade-offs in cache design.
So let's get into it.