Before we get into the details of these performance techniques,
we need to understand what it means to have good performance, how
we measure performance.
And also if we have a performance enhancement, then what kind of impact
we might have on the overall performance of our system.
So let's look at an example of a highway system.
So one way that you can improve performance
is by increasing the speed limit.
So if I increase the speed limit, it will take less time from a car
to move from one point to another.
So if I took a stopwatch, and I measured the time
it took you to get from one point to another,
with the older speed limit versus the new speed limit,
I should see less time.
So that would be a performance improvement.
Now another way that we can do this is by adding more lanes to our highway.
So we might keep the speed limit the same--
so any given car won't get to its destination any faster--
but I have more cars on my highway that I can accommodate.
So I have a higher-- what's called a-- bandwidth or throughput.
I have more cars passing through a certain stretch of my highway system
in a given time.
So that's also a way that we can measure the performance of our highway system.
Now in computer systems, we have similar measures.
So we have one, what's called execution time.
So this is the time to run a single program.
And that's of course an important measure,
so I want to run my programs fast on my smartphone
so I get a fast response as a user.
But another metric that we can use is bandwidth.
So if I have a data center in the cloud--
if I have more computers handling transactions
such as search transactions at Google, then I have higher throughput.
I'm getting more of those transactions happening at the same time.
I'm getting them done in the same unit of time.
So we have both execution time and throughput
as measures of performance in computer systems.
Now an important law in computer performance is called Amdahl's Law.
And what Amdahl's Law says is the performance
that I get over an enhancement is really dependent on how much
that enhancement is used.
So for instance, let's go back to our highway system.
If I improve the speed limit-- if I increase the speed
limit over a short stretch of highway, say a
couple of miles or a couple of kilometers, then
that's going to have only an impact on the cars that
are on that stretch of highway.
The rest of the highway is unaffected.
And so the performance improvement I will get
will be limited by the number of cars that use that stretch of highway.
And Amdahl's Law says the same for computer systems.
So if I have an enhancement to say a multiply instruction,
well the overall performance improvement that I get
will be dependent on how much we use that multiply instruction
in our programs.
So at the end of this module, you’ll understand
these aspects of computer performance, how
we measure computer performance, how we look at relative performance, what
kind of improvement that we get, and also this concept of Amdahl's Law.
So let's get into it.