An important input/output device on our computers is permanent storage.
This is where we permanently store our applications.
Now, in our smartphones this takes the form of flash memory.
Now, flash memory has some advantages.
It's pretty cheap.
It's pretty dense.
Also, like any permanent storage, it's non-volatile.
That means that when we turn off the power,
we don't lose the contents of our apps.
Those zeroes and ones are stored permanently in our flash memory.
Now, this is different than the memory that we use for main memory.
If we turn off the power, we lose the contents of our main memory.
So our main memory is only used to store part
of the apps which are ready to run in our smartphones at any given time.
Now, we've saved the discussion of flash memory, of permanent storage,
for this part of the course because although it has these advantages,
it's painfully slow.
It can take tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of cycles,
to access our flash memory.
Now, this is a serious performance problem.
Just like we had with main memory, where we bridge the performance gap
with caches, we need to have some kind of solution
to this very, very slow flash memory.
And that's the subject of this module.
We'll talk about how we get the operating system involved when we need
to access something from flash memory.
Now initially, we'll load part of our program,
and that's going to take some time.
But later on when we want to get more of our program
and bring it in from flash memory into memory,
we need to do something to try to hide that tens of thousands
and now hundreds of thousands of cycles of latency.
And one way we do this is we switch to another program.
So the operating system may temporarily suspend the running program
while that transfer takes place and run something else
that we want to run in our smartphones.
And while that's happening, the hardware will automatically
be doing this transfer.
It'll be transferring the required data from flash memory
into main memory in parallel.
So this is another form of parallelism that we have in our smartphones.
And another thing that we'll do is, similar to what we've done in caches,
is we'll bring in a large page from flash memory, a large quantity of data,
typically kilobytes of data, from the flash memory into our main memory
because we have locality in our programs.
So we'll talk about this whole subject of flash memory
and how we get around these performance problems in this module right now.
So let's get into.