An important component of a von Neumann machine that we've largely
ignored so far is input/output or I/O. Now, this is the interface to the user
and it's the primary way that we experience our smartphones.
So, for instance, if I touch an icon to open up an app,
or I type on my keyboard, well, that's input.
When I see that app opening or I see my keystrokes, well, that's output.
If I send a message to a friend-- a text message-- over the network.
Well, that's using the input part of that network.
And the output part of the network is when I receive a message from a friend.
If I take my permanent storage, which is where I store my apps
and I open up an app and I read that app from permanent storage
into memory, well, that's input.
When I update my operating system or I have a new app
that I load on my permanent storage, well, that's output.
So permanent storage is also an important input/output device.
And we have these in other computer systems
as well, such as laptops and servers and all these kind of systems.
Now, input/output spans multiple layers of the computing stack.
So, first we have microarchitecture.
So we have an input/output controller, which
is an important piece of hardware that connects the processor and the memory
to the input/output device.
For instance, permanent storage or the network.
Now, that input/output device controller has special registers
that are used for the CPU or the processor
to interact with the input/output device.
And the instruction set architecture comes into play because we need a way,
we need instructions or some other means,
in order for the processor to read and write those registers.
And there are a couple of important ways to do that.
And we'll cover that in this module.
And finally, there's software.
There's a software layer here.
We need software routines that allow the CPU, the processor,
and the memory and the I/O device to interact with each other.
And we're going to write assembly language LC-3 routines for input/output.
So at the end of this module you'll see all of those layers of the I/O stack.
We'll update the LC-3 microarchitecture with the details of input/output,
and at the same time we're also going to fill out
the details of our memory system so you see how all this fits together.
Then we're going to talk about the LC-3 enhancements
to the instruction set architecture in order to support input/output.
And finally we're going to develop LC-3 assembly language
routines for input/output devices.
So let's get into it.