In this module, we're starting at the bottom of the stack.
We're going to start with numbers.
Your smartphone can do a lot of things-- take pictures, send emails.
But what it's doing is it's manipulating numbers.
It's storing numbers.
It's doing arithmetic on numbers.
Let's talk about numbers a bit.
We're all familiar with numbers.
We use numbers every day.
Our number system is based on the number 10.
That's the base that we say for our number system.
Well, computers are a little different.
They actually use 2 instead of 10 as the base.
Now you say, why is that?
Why does a computer do something different than what we humans do?
Why does it use base 2 rather than base 10?
Well, the answer is when you're designing a system, a computer system,
around base 2, you only have two values in each position.
You only have 0 or you have 1.
With base 10, you've got 0 through 9.
And it makes it a lot easier to represent just two values
in electronic circuits than ten values.
All you have to do is you either have to produce a voltage,
and every electronic circuit receives some voltage,
either represent a voltage as a 1.
So when I have a voltage, then that means I have a 1.
And when I have no voltage, when I have 0 volts, that means I have a 0.
So the circuits only have to do one of two things,
either make a connection to the voltage, or break that connection
to make a connection to 0 volts, to what we call ground in a computer system.
So those circuits are very simple with base 2.
They're much, much simpler than if we had to design a circuit for base 10.
Here we would have to produce 10 different voltage values.
The circuitry would be far more complex than for base 2 where all we have to do
is represent two.
Now you're saying, I can hear you saying,
that well you know I need to have more positions in my system,
in my number system, for base 2 than base 10
to represent the same number of values.
And you're absolutely correct.
For base 10, if I'm representing 0 through 9, I just need one position.
For base 2, for binary, I will need 4 positions to represent 0 through 9.
So I have more circuits.
I have to have four of those circuits rather than just one in base 10.
But the circuits are far simpler than the base 10, that single base 10
circuit.
So when you're looking, if you're an engineer
and you're looking at the trade-offs between performance and power and cost,
having more of those simpler circuits in base 2
wins out over having that single complex circuit in base 10.
So that's why computers use base 2, the binary number system.
And now we're going to get into this in more detail.
So let's get into it.