Hi, I'm Dave Albonesi, and I want to welcome you to the computing
technology inside your smartphone.
Over the course of the next eight weeks, we're
going to explore the layers of computing hardware and software found
in your smartphone, the techniques that computer architects use
to make our smartphones so fast, and then we're
going to take a look inside one of the leading smartphone processors
that many of you have inside your own smartphone.
Now, I'm thrilled to have the opportunity
to offer this class, which is based on one that I created here
at Cornell for Engineering freshmen.
And I'm excited to teach you about how this amazing little computer that we
carry around with us works.
After you've completed the course, you'll look at your smartphone
with an abundance of technical knowledge about what
is going on underneath the covers.
Now, the beauty of this course is that you don't need a technical background
to succeed, yet those of you with a technical background
will still learn a lot because we'll cover a wealth of topics
from transistors to software to performance to real smartphone chips.
And this course will also serve as a springboard to dive
more deeply into various other technical subjects.
Now, engineering usually involves design, and a feature of this course
is that it's not just about watching videos and doing homework.
You will use a logic design tool to gradually create a working computer,
and you're going to run programs on your computer to see that it works.
And for those of you who want to dive really deeply into the subject,
we're going to organize hackathons that will give you the opportunity
to enhance your own design even further.
Finally, you're going to hear from a number of special guests, professors,
students, people from industry, to talk about their research, their careers,
the challenges involved in designing smartphone processors,
and a look into the future.
Now let's talk about what you will learn and what
you will design in this course.