The processor inside your smartphone does not understand Java, or Python,
or C++, or Fortran, or any high level language.
What it understands is the instructions, and operating modes,
and addressing modes, and all of the details
specified by the instruction set architecture.
Now your smartphone probably runs either an ARM instruction set
or an Intel instruction set.
Now those instruction sets are designed by the engineers at those companies.
So those companies define the instructions, and the operating modes,
and the addressing modes, and a lot of other things
that the hardware needs to do in order to be an Intel, or ARM,
or whatever instruction set compliant hardware machine.
Now we like to write programs though in these high level languages.
It's much more productive to do it that way
than to use the instructions in the instruction set architecture.
And you're going to see this for yourself in the course.
So how do we make this link between what the hardware understands
and the high level language?
Well, we have a compiler or interpreter.
Compiler or interpreter is a piece of software that's written that comes with
the system that translates Java, or Python, or C++,
or whatever high level language you program in into the instructions
and addressing modes and all those things that are specified
by the instruction set architecture.
So the instruction set architecture brings the hardware and software
together.
The hardware is designed to support the instruction set.
And the compiler or interpreter is designed
to translate from high level language to the instruction set.
So it's the contract between the hardware and software.
Now the ARM and Intel instruction sets are really too complicated
to cover in a course like this.
So we have an instruction set which we've already
mentioned called the LC-3.
Now the LC-3 has a small number of instructions and operating modes,
but it's very, very powerful in that it's simple to understand,
but you can do a lot with it.
So in this module, we're going to fill out the details of the LC-3.
We're going to go back and forth between the instruction set
architecture of the LC-3 and the LC-3 microarchitecture.
So as we add new LC-3 instructions, we're
going to also add the necessary support in our microarchitecture design.
So let's get into it.