This is a quick demo of how to use Jade to enter schematics and simulate circuits.
In this example, we'll build a gate-level schematic for a simple logic function involving
two inputs, A and B.
We're going to build the function A'B' + AB. It's composed of two 2-input AND gates, followed
by one 2-input OR gate. We'll need a couple of inverters as well.
The instructor has already set up the module with a schematic, icon, and test tabs, the
icon and test are provided and marked read-only.
The parts bin on the right has the gates we are going to use: a 2-input OR gate, a 2-input
AND gate, and an inverter.
The appropriate input and output ports are already present in the schematic. We'll provide
the rest of the circuit.
Let's start by placing the AND and OR gates.
Click the AND gate in the parts bin and without releasing the button, drag it onto the schematic.
When it gets where we want it, release the  button and the AND gate will stay put.
Repeat for the process for the second AND gate.
Repeat again with the OR gate, placing it between the AND gate.  
Let's hook up our AND gate outputs to the OR gate inputs.
Look at the open circle on the right hand side of the AND gate. This circle indicates the output
of the AND gate.
Click in the circle, and holding down the mouse button, drag to create a wire, releasing
the button when we get to the input of the OR gate, like so. A wire is created.
Repeat for the second AND gate, connecting to the second OR input.
Now we need to connect the output of the OR gate to the output terminal, Z.
We could draw a wire to connect the OR gate to the Z output.
However, we can instead move the terminal so it'll connect to the OR gate without the
need to draw the wire.
We click and hold the terminal, then drag it such that the open circle lines up and disappear.
This indicates that they are connected.
Now let's talk about our inputs, A and B.
For circuits where we need both the regular and inverted version of an input, it's common
to create wires that run down the entire schematic for each version. We'll do that now.
We click the open circle of terminal A and click and drag to create a wire running down the entire left side.
Repeat for terminal B.
To create the inverted versions with these signals, we want to place the inverters right next to these wires.
To do so, we'll click and drag to bring an inverter on to the schematic. We want the inverters to be oriented top down
up and down so that they line up with the wires. To do so, click the rotate button  right here.
Now click and drag to bring the inverter next to our signals
a repeat of the second inverter
Now we connect the inputs of our inverters to the signals like so. Then we connect the outputs
and create the wire that goes down the length of the schematic, like so.
We now have our regular and inverted signals ready to connect them to our gates.
To connect our first AND gate, which handles the A+B part of our function, we click and
drag from the open input terminals to the desired
signal lines.
Since we want the regular versions of the signals for this AND gate, we click and drag
past all the other signals to the desired ones.
For B, we do like so.
Note that we create the connection a black connection dot appears.
Note that when 3 or more connections are made at a point Jade will mark the connection with
this dot, following a common convention used when drawing schematics.
Important to note is that the other vertical wires that cross the horizontal wires, without
the dot, are NOT connected.
Now that we have our AB gate wired up, let's wire up our A'B' gate.
We need to use the other inverted signals to hook up to this and gate. To do so we click
and drag to the desired signals.
Now that we're done, we can run the supplied test by clicking the green checkmark on the toolbar, like so.
Jade runs a simulation and plots the requested waveforms and verifies that the output terminal
Z has the correct value for each of the tests given.
Taking a quick look at the test tab, we can see that the instructor provided 4 test vectors, 1,2,3,4
which test all possible logic values for the 2 inputs.
Once we've passed, to record that we've passed in edX, we'll have to click the "check button"
right here.
If all is right, a green checkmark should show, like so
and edX will know that we've successfully completed the problem.