Now let's revisit the LC-3 microarchitecture.
We're going to look at the memory in more detail, as well
as the memory-mapped I/O hardware.
First of all, let's put down our memory and our memory data register
and memory address register.
Now, remember that the memory data register connects to the bus
through this tri-state driver.
Now, we also have a keyboard data register, a keyboard status register,
a display data register, and a display status register.
Now, what we need is some new control logic.
We need to know when we see a specific address, what
is the target of that address?
Is that memory?
Or is that one of these other registers associated with input/output?
So let's add that block.
Now, the memory address register connects to our memory
but also to the address control logic, because it
needs to know whether the address is associated with memory
or one of the I/O registers.
The address control logic also receives the enable
from the processor that tells it to do an operation.
The address control logic, in turn, will-- depending on the address,
and assuming that it’s enabled-- will enable the memory-- so we need a memory enable
from the address control logic-- or the keyboard status register
or the display data register or the display status register.
So we need enables for each one of those.
Now, the output of the memory data register goes to memory,
but it also may go to the keyboard status register or the DDR or DSR.
So let's make those connections.
Now we have a way to take an address and to take data
and to send that to the appropriate place-- either memory,
the KBSR, the DDR, or the DSR.
Now let's talk about how we read those different locations.
We may be reading information from the memory, the KBDR, the KBSR, or the DSR.
So we need a 4-to-1 mux in order to select one of those four.
So let's put that in.
And the select input to that is controlled by the address control
logic.
This mux takes as inputs the memory, the keyboard data register,
the keyboard status register, and the display status register.
Now, the MDR can receive data from that mux, or also from the bus,
when we're storing data into memory or into one of the registers.
So we need to add a 2-to-1 mux that has one input from the bus
and the other input from that 4-to-1 mux.
And we need another select input that's controlled by the address control
logic.
And the last piece that we need is a signal
that tells us whether we're reading or writing.
So let's put that down.
Now we have the complete microarchitecture
for our memory system, as well as our LC-3 input/output devices.