Now a multi-bit latch or a register, which is a set of flip-flops,
those are one dimensional structures in that they
can store only a single piece of data.
With the memory, we have a two dimensional structure
that can store multiple pieces of data.
Now we can think of this as a k by m array of stored bits.
Now we need an address to pick which location in our memory
we're going to read or write.
Now if we have n address bits then that gives us two to the n locations.
In our example, we're saying that's k.
Now the address space is the number of locations
in our memory, which is usually a power of two,
because we're dealing with binary numbers for our address.
In this case, we have k locations.
And the addressability is the number of bits that we store in every location.
And in this case, that's m bits.
Here's an example of a four by three memory.
Here we have four locations and each one of those stores three bits.
Now this has a lot of pieces to it, but these are all pieces
that we've already covered in the course.
Let's first start with each of the locations,
each cell in the memory, which is where we store a bit.
In this example, in this type of memory that we're going to talk about,
we have in each cell a D latch.
So you should recognize this as a D latch.
Here's the write enable and here's the D input to our D latch.
And each one of these locations, each one of these 12 locations,
here is identical.
We have a D latch.
Now we have a column of data that feeds into each location.
So in this case, we have 3 bits in every location.
So you see that we feed in a data bit into each of the columns.
We have the same data bit going to each of the four cells in each column.
Now we need to be able to select one of these rows.
We're going to select one row of three bits in this memory.
And the way we do that is by using our address.
So because we have four rows, we need two address bits
to identify the row that we want to read or write.
And the way we do that is with these NAND gates and these bubbles.
Now you should recognize this as a two to four decoder.
Remember, with a two to four decoder, we have two inputs
and we have four outputs, and one of those outputs is a one
and the other are zero.
So this allows us to select one and only one row with our address bits.
Now the outputs of the decoder are used to pick one of these rows.
Now let's look at the data output of the top row.
So when our address is zero, zero, then the output of the top decoder
will be a one, and we're going to have a one
at the input of each of those AND gates for the data coming out.
So what's that going to do?
That's going to allow the data that's out of each of those cells
to pass through their NAND gates in order to go to the output.
Now what's going to happen to the other NAND gates
in the rows that aren't selected?
The bottom three decoder outputs will be zero.
And so the remaining nine AND gates for the data output will be zero
and so the three left inputs to each of the bottom OR gates
are going to be zero.
So what's that going to do?
That's going to allow our data from the first row
to appear at the output queue.
Now let's talk about how we write the first row.
We need to have again our address be zero, zero in order
to be able to select those top three cells.
But now our write enable input is going to be a one.
Previously when we read, we had that be a zero
so that we didn't overwrite anything in those cells.
With the write enable being a one and the output of the decoder being a one,
then we will have the write enable input for each of the three cells
in our selected row will be a one.
That’ll allow us to take the data coming into those cells
and to overwrite the data that's in those three d latches.
Now we're going to use memories like this
later in the course to hold instructions and data when we build our computer.