Let's begin by talking about multiprocessing and multicore.
So multiprocessors are a computer system with more than one processor.
Now a computer with one processor is called a uniprocessor.
And multicore takes the idea of multiprocessing
and puts it onto a single chip.
So where those multiprocessors in older systems-- and this idea
is decades old-- under those older systems
maybe on separate chips or even separate boards.
Well, the multicore, the processors are all integrated on a single chip.
There are a number of advantages of multiprocessing.
And one of those is exploiting thread-level parallelism
by splitting a task among multiple processors.
Now this is very useful for things like scientific programs, for databases,
for media processing, web browsers, games.
There's all kinds of applications of this.
Now this also provides tolerance to failures in higher-end systems.
So if one processor fails, well I have these other processors that I can use.
Now the system may not have the same performance, but it's still usable.
It doesn't have to just be taken down completely.
It still can be available to us.
And another advantage-- and this is really the drive
to multicore-- is power efficiency.
So several modestly superscalar processors
can be more power efficient than one very aggressive processor
design that tries to-- very wide superscalar,
lots of out of order execution, lots of threads.
That's not as power efficient as taking several modestly designed cores
and putting them on a single chip.
And this is the major incentive that we have
multicore chips in our smartphones.
However, multiprocessing is not without its challenges.
One is that parallel programming-- writing
a parallel version of a program-- can be difficult and can be error prone.
And some programs are just not easy to parallelize.
They just don't lend themselves to be made into a multithreaded program.
Now here Amdahl's Law also applies.
And Amdahl's Law, as applied to this particular case,
says that the serial part of a parallel program
will limit the performance improvement.
So every parallel program has a serial part
where there's just one thread that's running, and we
don't have multiple threads running.
And that can limit the overall performance improvement.
Also there's a nontrivial cost of communicating and coordination
among these different threads.
And we're going to see that we have to communicate
when we talk about, later on, we’ll talk about cache coherence.
Here's a general block diagram of a shared memory
multiprocessor or SMP for short.
Here we have a number of different processors
with their individual caches.
And those are connected to each other as well as
to a single memory and a single I/O. So all processors
share the same memory and I/O devices.
It's visible to all of them.
Now processors can share data by reading and writing to memory.
So if processor one wants to communicate with another processor,
it can do this through normal loads and stores to memory.
And this is widely used in multicore chips.
Our multicore chips use this type of shared memory multiprocessing.
Now multicore is multiprocessing on a chip.
So let's look at a typical multicore chip organization.
We have a number of processors with their pipelines
and their individual caches.
Now what we've shown here is that we've grouped those together.
And they share another level of cache called a level 2 or L2 cache.
Now that's the second level of cache, which
is bigger than the level 1 caches.
Now we've changed those in the pipeline to show those as L1 or level 1 caches.
Now those are the small caches, which are
associated with instructions and data.
Now each of those processors share a second level of cache called level 2.
And this might be bigger.
So whereas the level 1 cache is maybe, say 16 kilobytes or 32 kilobytes,
for instance,
the level 2 cache may be a megabyte in size.
So it's bigger.
Now it's slower, but now if we miss in the level 1 caches,
we don't have to go all the way out to those slow DRAM.
We can go to the level 2 cache and look up there
to see whether we have our instruction or data.
So it's going to be slower to access this level 2 cache,
because it's a little bit bigger.
But it's not going to be as slow as main memory.
And what we typically do-- and this isn't always the case in our chips--
what we typically do is we have a shared level 2
cache among multiple processors and their level 1 caches.
Now each of those level 2 caches connects to an interconnect
where we connect to a memory controller.
And that memory controller is also on our chip.
And that memory controller connects to a DRAM, which
is a separate chip that may be integrated
in the same package as our processor chip,
but it wouldn't be on the same chip as our processors.
We also have a set of I/O controllers that
connect to our shared interconnect.
And those can be accessed by all of the processors.
The registers associated with each of the I/O controllers
are accessible to all the processors.
So they share the I/O as well.
And those I/O controllers connect to I/O buses for things like our display,
our touchscreen, or separate chips that control communication to the internet
or to Bluetooth.
Now just as with pipelining and other advanced performance techniques,
it's really not this easy.
We have some challenges associated with designing multicore chips.
Now we're going to talk about one of the main challenges,
and that's cache coherence.