Now we're going to put these transistors together to form digital circuits.
But before we do that, we need to talk about how
we represent connections and wires.
Now a wire is a piece of metal that connects transistors together.
And computer chips actually have layers of wiring above them
in order to make those connections between transistors.
Let's look at a circuit, that we're going to see a little bit later,
that does a useful digital function.
And let's talk here about the wiring and also about the connections.
So in the circuit I have four transistors,
and I have two inputs shown to the left.
And let's just label them a and b.
We have our two inputs, a and b, and we have one output to the right.
Let's just call that c.
So here's our output c.
Now I have a few places in this diagram where I've drawn a dot.
So for instance, where you see b coming into the circuit, you see a dot there.
So right here I have a dot, and this denotes where I have a connection.
So this shows I have a connection between the vertical
and the horizontal wires there.
So this is a connection of b to this wire that's going up and down.
Now I have a couple of other places here where I've also drawn dots.
So here where a comes in, it goes to this p type transistor,
but also it branches off through this vertical wire
that goes down to this N-type transistor down at the bottom.
Now I also have this point here where my output comes out of the circuit.
That also has a dot that also denotes a connection.
Now there are a couple of places where I haven't drawn a dot that you
might be wondering about.
So let's look at this place here, where I actually omitted a dot.
I really should draw a dot there to denote a connection.
But here, because there's a t, there's no ambiguity.
It's pretty clear because I have a t here that there's a connection.
So I can leave that out.
And if you see a t like this where there's a dot,
then you know that there's a connection.
Also this place down here where I connect the two N-type transistors,
I've also not drawn a dot but it's pretty
clear there's no ambiguity that there is a wire that connects
those two and the connection is made.
It's pretty clear there.
Now there's another point here that you might
be wondering about where it's really not clear whether there's a connection
or not.
And that's this point here, where a comes
into the circuit, this crossover point.
So I haven't drawn a dot here, so that means there's no connection.
Now what if I drew the dot and it was a little bit unclear?
I drew a small dot?
Well, you might mistake that as having no connection,
as these wires crossing over each other as they're really
supposed to in this diagram.
And so in order to avoid this ambiguity, whenever you see a crossover like this
it means there's no connection.
It means that one wire is passing over the other.
In fact, in these layers in a computer chip,
these layers of wiring, that's exactly what happens.
You have one layer that goes in one direction, another layer that
goes in another.
They're crossing over each other like one road crossing over another.
It's very, very similar to that.
Now if we wanted to draw a connection here,
if we actually wanted to connect a to those wires-- the input a,
the wire that has a on it to there-- well in order to avoid ambiguity,
we would draw it like this.
We would put a, we would have a wire like this,
we would have a wire with a dot branching up to the top,
and then we would put another wire here.
So this avoids any ambiguity.
This shows that very clearly because I have two t connections
now that I'm connecting these wires together.
Whereas in this other example, I'm not connecting.
One passes over the other.
Now a couple of other symbols that we have
in the circuit that we need to clarify.
This symbol here is where we have the power supply connection.
So this is the connection to whatever power we're supplying,
whatever voltage we're supplying to the circuits.
And we see the symbol that represents a connection to the voltage.
And this symbol down here is what we call ground, or 0 volts.
So this is the connection to ground.
You might see other symbols for ground.
For instance, this is a common symbol also that you see for ground.
And there are others as well, but this makes this symbol here
that I've drawn here as well as the one I've
drawn to the right is the symbol for ground, for 0 volts.
Now, the last thing we need to talk about is when we have multiple wires,
and how we represent those.
So it can be very tedious to draw circuits where I have say 8 wires.
And actually when we create our computer,
we're actually going to have a lot of places
where we're passing 16 wires around.
Now that can be very tedious to draw, and it can be very confusing.
You have to count the number of wires and it can take up a lot of space.
So we have a shorthand for doing that.
So for instance, if I wanted to draw four wires like this,
instead of drawing those individual wires I can just draw one wire,
and put a slash through it, and put the number of wires that this represents.
So this is a handy shorthand for representing multiple wires.
So now that we have this out of the way we
can move on to creating useful digital circuits.