Let's begin with the stored program computer, which is historically
attributed to John von Neumann.
John von Neumann wrote a report on this concept, on the stored program concept,
and this was known as the first draft of the report on EDVAC.
Now, this report was obtained and widely circulated
and so the proposed structure became known as a von Neumann machine.
Now, the components of the von Neumann machine are first of all a memory
and the memory holds both data as well as instructions.
It has a processing unit for performing arithmetic and logical operations
and then a control unit, which orchestrates the operation
and interprets instructions.
Here's an overall depiction of the von Neumann model.
In the center, we have the processing unit.
This is where the processing takes place.
Here we have an arithmetic and logic unit
or ALU where we do arithmetic and logical operations
as well as this block called Temp.
This is where we have temporary storage of data
that we're going to use for doing operations.
We also have a memory, and the memory holds
both the instructions for our program as well as the data
that that program operates on and has two registers,
one called the memory address register, the second memory data register
and we're going to cover those in just a second.
It also has input and output, so input are things like a keyboard
and mouse, could be a scanner, could be a hard disk.
And the output could be things like a monitor, printer, LEDs.
It could also be a hard disk and a hard disk is both an input device
-we read information from a hard disk-as well as an output device-
we store it there.
And then we finally have the control unit.
A control unit orchestrates the operation,
orchestrates the flow of an instruction through these different units.
And it has two main components, one, the PC or the program counter
and second is the instruction register.
The program counter points in memory to where
the next instruction is to be obtained and the instruction register
holds that instruction.
Let's start with the processing unit.
The processing unit has two components.
The first is the arithmetic and logic unit or ALU.
So this performs arithmetic and logical operations.
Now for the LC-3, this is the computer that we're
going to build in this course where LC stands for little computer and 3 is
the third version of that.
We have three operations, ADD, AND, and NOT, which are used by the ALU.
Now, the second component are registers.
This is a small amount of temporary storage for holding data.
This is both input data for operations, for instance,
two pieces of data we want to add as well as
the results of those operations.
And for LC-3, we have 8 registers, call them R0 through R7,
and those are 16 bits each.
Now, this brings up the topic of a word size.
A word size is the number of bits that the ALU can process in one instruction.
It's also the width of our registers.
And for LC-3, we have 16-bit registers, and our ALU can handle 16-bit data,
so LC-3 is a 16-bit machine.