Now there are two types of transistors, an n-type and a p-type.
Let's start with an n-type.
The n means negative because it uses electrons.
The way this works is when the gate-- that's a certain input--
has a voltage-- and we call this a 1-- then
there's a short circuit created between the other two terminals, 1 and 2.
So there's three terminals, the gate, terminal 1 and terminal 2.
And when the gate is 1, then the switch between 1 and 2
is closed so the current can flow between those two terminals.
When the gate has no voltage-- so when it's input
is a 0-- then that opens the switch between 1 and 2.
So there's no connection.
And no current can flow.
Here's the symbol for an n-type transistor.
We have, again, three terminals.
We have the gate, which comes in from the side here.
And then we have the other terminals, 1 and 2.
And again, when the gate is a 1, then we're going to close the switch.
When the gate is a 0, then that opens the switch and no current can flow.
Now, I've shown here terminal 2 as being connected to what's called ground,
or 0 volts.
And in our circuits that we're going to talk about, our digital circuits,
we're going to have a connection to ground in all the circuits.
Now, it's going to be useful for us later on
to see why we make this connection to ground for this n-type transistor.
Now, let's talk about the p-type transistor,
where p stands for positive, because it uses positively
charged carriers called holes.
Now here the behavior is the opposite from the n-type.
When the gate has a voltage, a 1, then that's when the switch is open.
We have an open circuit between 1 and 2.
And no current can flow.
Now when the gate has no voltage, a 0 in the input,
that's when we close the switch.
That's when we have a short circuit between terminals 1 and 2.
Here's how we're represent a p-type MOS transistor.
You can see it looks like the n-type, except we
put this bubble on the gate input to distinguish it from the n-type.
Now here the behavior again is different.
When the gate has an input of a 1, then I open the switch.
With an n-type, that's when we closed it.
And when the gate is a 0, that's when I close the switch.
Whereas with an n-type, it would be open.
Now what I've done here is I've connected terminal 1 to 2.9 volts.
We're using that as an example of our supply voltage.
So we're going to see why it's useful later on
to connect that terminal 1 to the supply voltage for our p-type transistor.
Now that we've seen n and p-type transistors,
let's put them together in what's called a CMOS circuit.
Now CMOS stands for complementary metal oxide semiconductor-- metal oxide
semiconductor because those are the three types of materials
that we use to construct the circuit, and complementary
because it takes advantage of the complementary properties
of the n and p-type transistors.
So we use both of these types.
And the p-type transistors, we have a connection to the supply voltage
as we showed you earlier.
And what that does is that will pull the output voltage up to a 1
for particular inputs.
With the n-type transistors, we connect the output to ground.
So we have this connection.
One of the terminals is connected to ground, like we saw earlier.
And so this allows us to pull the output voltage down to 0
for particular values of the inputs.
Now, it turns out that for this type of circuit, for every combination of input
values, the output is either going to be connected to ground or to the voltage,
but never to both.