Now, you said you have four opcodes?
Four bits.
Four bits.
I'm sorry.
Four bits for an opcode.
16 opcodes.
But one is reserved.
So people might wonder, why not use all 16?
Why do you have one opcode that's unused?
So it turns out I had 16 opcodes.
So as you pointed out, and I also reiterated,
it's a rich instruction set even though it's a very small instruction set.
In that instruction set is a subroutine call return mechanism,
which you have to do for richness.
And I had a call instruction-- JSR, Jump to Subroutine.
And I had a return instruction.
In fact, curiously-- and I didn't realize this at the time--
but my call return mechanism is the same as what
ARM introduced when they introduced the ARM version 1 a long time ago.
So brilliant minds think alike, as they say.
The call return mechanism works by the call instruction.
So when you call a procedure or subroutine, the program is running,
and now what you do is you want to do this extra piece of work.
So there is an instruction that says, go there and do this piece of work,
and when you get done, come back.
Come back where?
To the place where you came from.
So you have to save that location someplace.
And I save it in register 7.
I don't know where ARM-- ARM saves it in the register also.
So the call saying, go do this piece of work
also has to save that address to come back to.
You get done, and you want to jump-- that is, come back to here.
And the instruction that does that is the same as the jump instruction.
So I'm lecturing to this class of freshmen-- and there's 400 of them
out there-- and this kid raises his hand, and he says,
why do you have the return instruction?
Why don't you just use the standard jump instruction, which
is another one of your instructions, only
identify which register in the instruction,
and now you've got the return, and you don't need the return opcode?
You've saved yourself an opcode.
And I'm up there, and I-- wow.
That's brilliant.
And of course, I did it.
Now, there's a side note to this, by the way-- this was like 10 years ago,
I guess.
No, more than that, because the book came out in 2004,
so it was probably 11, 12 years ago.
Every time that kid has needed a letter of recommendation,
he has reminded me that he was the freshman--
He was the one who taught you about your instruction set.
He's the one the taught me that I didn't need a return instruction.
So I got 15 now.
So what do I do with the other opcode?
And I decided, let me just leave it for future use.
I'm a good engineer.
Contingency.
Leave it for future use.